---
title: How to Focus on the Things that Matter
author: Andrew Werner
id: how-to-focus-on-the-things-that-matter
subtitle: We all face distractions but if we deal with them correctly we can
  become the masters of our own time
image: /2019-11-28-how-to-focus-on-the-things-that-matter/focus.jpg
---

Picture the most charismatic person you can think of. They ooze confidence, are
decisive, could convince you of any course of action, no matter how ludicrous
and to top it all off they have great hair!

One of the first people I worked for fit this description almost to the letter.
As I’ve talked about
[previously](https://andrewwerner.blog/articles/2019-11-08-learning-to-lead-quickly)
, I’m a big believer in learning by observing others and this certainly fit that
bill. But, despite all this raw talent it was actually the flaws I noticed in
this fantastic leader that over time provided my real lessons.

## A Flawed Leader

I first noticed something one day when I walked into my bosses office to talk
through an alteration to training plan. He was sat behind his desk and, as we
talked, I kept hearing a number of small pinging noises.

At each ping he would briefly turn towards the screen on his desk, squint, then
remember he was mid conversation and turn back towards me. What was meant to be
a quick five minute chat turned into a rather unproductive twenty minute waffle.

For some reason, this stuck in my mind and having seen it once I now began to
notice this pattern on repeat. Throughout the day I noticed him rapidly flitting
between multiple short term tasks and meetings without actually getting anything
done.

As the day would draw to a close and the number of distractions began to
decrease he would suddenly become productive working through all the tasks he
had accumulated but not worked on during the day. This was particularly sad to
see as it often meant he worked late into the night in order to be ready for the
next day.

## Seeing the Contrast

A little later I moved roles and began to work for an almost diametrically
different boss. Gone was the raw charisma, style, llare and as it turns out hair
(perhaps there’s a link). In place of these came a structured rigidity and
process that felt stifling. In all honesty, it was a shock and one that to begin
with I didn’t entirely take to.

Despite my initial reaction, as time went by, I began to notice a few things.
My new boss was hugely efficient. More interestingly, this efficiency, over
time, seemed to infect the whole organisation. And where once people had
grumbled about a “micromanaging busy-body” they now began to speak about a
“solid operator”. The question I had: how did he do it?

## Becomming Effective

Observing my new boss over the course of a couple of years I noticed that while
he employed a myriad of strategies to help improve his effectiveness all of them
combined enabled him to do just one thing: control his own time.

This might sound simple but this was a man in demand with responsibility for an
organisation of approximately six-hundred people and all their associated
budgets and equipment. The way he achieved this was with the combination of a
few small habits and tricks that all combined placed him in the driving seat to
decide where to dedicate his time and attention.

## Communication

First on the list: communication. He would schedule two periods into the day at
11:00 and 17:00 where he would shut the door and open his emails.
[Research](https://www.telegraph.co.uk/science/2016/03/12/humans-have-shorter-attention-span-than-goldfish-thanks-to-smart/)
shows that our use of technology has severely hampered our ability to concentrate
due to the many competing dopamine hits we receive from attention seeking
communication channels. These constant draws on our attention lead us to spread
our focus across multiple channels for which we pay the price of losing the time
that it takes to move between two tasks.

While these slithers of space may in isolation be small, across an entire day,
week or year they constitute a huge amount of lost or dead time. Each individual
task also takes longer to complete as every time we bring our attention back to
it we have to rebuild the mental context we had created the last time we were
working on it. We truly do run out of time.

By removing these as distractions my new boss was able to focus on emails when
emails were his priority and deal with them effectively. And, while many others
would spend all day trading emails he was always able to keep on top of a far
busier inbox in a far smaller portion of time.

## Unwanted Guests

We’ve all been in a situation where you’ve had your mind absorbed by a problem:
you’re turning it round and round in your head, you feel like you might be
getting somewhere and then bam, your friendly co-worker just has a “quick”
question for you. Right after you answer the,
it-turns-out-not-so-quick-question, you focus back to the problem you were
facing and with a sigh begin to reconstruct the mental model you had spent most
of the morning building. Sound familiar? That’s right, it’s the same issue
created by over-active emails: context switching.

To reduce this cause of context switching my new boss created a gatekeeper. To
see him you had to go through her and she had strict instructions to only ever
allow meetings into his diary with at least a days notice.

In his experience creating this space would often get people to think through
their issues and solve them without the meeting in the first place. Anecdotally,
it has been my experience that we are always acutely aware of the use of our own
time but rarely have the same level of appreciation for the time we take from
others.

As the final line of defence, for those repeat offenders who tried to ignore
the structures he had set in place there was always the spectre of the shut door
to his office. This was the key sign to everyone that he was working through
some planned task and that any interruptions were not welcome.

## Socialising

You’re might be thinking, “this guy sounds like a complete robot”. And, this
certainly mirrored some of the initial reactions his subordinates had to his way
of working. However, he was also acutely aware of the role that socialising
played in allowing him to effectively manage his organisation so he implemented
an informal morning coffee break for all the managers that provided an avenue
for anyone who needed to talk to him without a meeting to do so. It proved to be
great for all the other managers too and really reduced the number of other
meetings that previously had taken up so much time.

## How Can This Help Me?

You might also be thinking: how do I put this into practice? I don’t have an
office, I don’t have the luxury of an assistant. And that’s true for most of us.
However, there are definitely subtle things we can do that have the same effect.

 - Make your diary public and available to anyone who wants to see you.
 - Book time for the tasks you wish to accomplish and leave small slots for people to book time with you.
 - Decline or suggest a date/reschedule meetings that are booked on the same day.
 - Try to incorporate a period of time for socialising that becomes a routine occurrence. Morning coffee breaks are the best that I’ve found.
 - If you have a personal office, close the door when you want to work.
 - If you work in an open plan office, put large noise cancelling headphones on in place of an office door (I’ve found that the more obvious these are the better).
 - When working on your own tasks always close down any other forms of communication e.g. slack/skype.

It may seem simple but, putting these measures in place can have a huge impact
on your ability to get things done. Not just that, but it can massively help
with things like workplace anxiety and feelings associated with being
overwhelmed by work simply because it places you in the driving seat of your own
day and not in a whirlpool stirred by the whims of everyone around you. And just
for a second imagine what your workplace would be like if all those around you
were efficient, productive, on top of their work and generally respected your
time and ability to get things done. It sounds like quite a nice place to work!

---

_This is the second in a series of articles on practical leadership, I really
hope it was useful for you. If you would like to read further articles in the
series enter your email below and you’ll be updated whenever a new article is
published (approximately once/twice a month)._

